# Input data

The input data required:

- Phenotype file
- Map file
- Genotype/Haplotype files

## Phenotype file format

Phenotype file consists of an id column, followed by the phenotype or trait columns. It can be separated with spaces, tabs, or commas.
Missing value is set to -9999111 by default but can be specified with an option.

```text
ID Sex Phenotype1 Phenotype2
1 1.23 10.11
2 4.56 7.89
3 12.13 14.15
```

or csv style

```csv
ID,Sex,Phenotype1,Phenotype2
1,1.23,10.11
2,4.56,7.89
3,12.13,14.15
```

## Map file

Map file consists of an id column, followed by chromosome number column, followed by position column. It can be separated with spaces, tabs, or commas.

```text
ID Chr Position
1 1 1456
2 1 2487
3 2 893
```
or csv style

```csv
ID,Chr,Position
1,1,1456
2,1,2487
3,2,893
```

## Genotype and Haplotype files
These can be all SNPs in one file or separated by chromosomes.

### SNP files
The genotype file format consists of id column followed by SNP columns. SNPs are coded 0,1,2; any other number is treated as missing value


```text
ID SNP1 SNP2 SNP3
1 1 0 1
2 0 1 2
3 2 1 5
```

### Haplotype files
The haplotype file format consists of id column followed by SNP allele columns. Each SNP has two columns for allel1 and allele2, they are coded 0 or 1.
This file, along with generated hap_info files are used to produce the hap_geno files used for haplotype GRM.


```text
ID SNP1_0 SNP1_1 SNP2_0 SNP2_1 SNP3_0 SNP3_1
1 1 0 1 1 0 1
2 0 1 0 0 1 1
3 1 1 1 0 1 1
```

#### Generating hap_geno files


Hapgeno files are created by defining a "multi-allelic loci" or a blocks of phased SNPs using get.hap.geno.py script and helper scripts to generate the block definition files.
To produce this file the user needs to define haplotype blocks.

#### Defining haplotype blocks

The first step to define haplotype genotypes is to define haplotype blocks, where each block is treated as a ‘locus’ and each haplotype within the block as an ‘allele’. Functional and structural genomics information can be used to define haplotype blocks (based on genes, ChIP-seq, etc). Haplotype blocks are considered independent in the model and can be defined as adjacent blocks or overlapping (sliding blocks). The sliding block method is more computationally intensive because there are many more blocks but may provide better resultsby capturing interactions that may have been split by adjacent blocking method.

The following Python programs implement a number of methods for defining haplotype blocks.

- **block-by-snp.py**:
    + Purpose: Generate haplotype block information files by fixed number of SNPs. Blocks are defined consequtively and are adjacent to eachother.
    + Input: map file, number of SNPs per block
    + Output: hap_info files
    
- **block-by-snp-sliding.py**:
    + Purpose: Generate haplotype block information files by fixed number of SNPs. Blocks overlap so that the beginning of each block is a set number of SNPs apart.
    + Input: map file, number of SNPs per block
    + Output: hap_info files
    
- **block-by-kb.py**: 
    + Purpose: Generate haplotype block information files by fixed distance in kb. Blocks are defined consequtively and are adjacent to eachother.
    + Input: map file, size of block
    + Output: hap_info files

- **block-by-kb-sliding.py**: 
    + Purpose: Generate haplotype block information files by fixed distance in kb. Blocks overlap so that the beginning of each block is a set number of SNPs apart.
    + Input: map file, size of block
    + Output: hap_info files

- **block-by-pos.py**:
    + Purpose: Generate haplotype block information files with a list of begin and end positions to provide flexibility to use functional and structural information to define haplotype blocks.
    + Input: list of blocks in the format “chr:beginPos-endPos”, map file
    + Output: hap_info files

The **hap_info** files generated by these programs are editable or can be created by the user for custom definitions of haplotype blocks. An example of a **hap_info** file for a chromosome with 4 SNP blocks:

```text
blk1    0 3
blk2    4 7
blk3    8 9
```

#### Producing haplotype genotype files from defined blocks 

 **get-hap-geno.py** can be used to generate the haplotype files from user provided input files (imputed SNP genotypes and input files for the positions of haplotype blocks of each chromosome: hap and hap_info files).

- **get-hap-geno.py**:
    + Purpose: generate haplotype genotype files using block definitions
    + Input: hap_info files, haplotype files, (coding for missing alleles)
    + Output: hap_geno files

The haplotypes files are provided by the user from popular  software (Beagle, FINDHAP, etc). Each haplotype block is described by two columns in the haplotype file, where each haplotype is treated as an ‘allele’ and each haplotype block is treated as a ‘multi-allelic locus’. One individual per row. 

Example of a haplotype genotype input file:
```text
ID hap_1_1 hap_1_1 hap_1_2 hap_1_2 hap_1_3 hap_1_3
1 1 1 1 1 1 1
2 1 2 1 2 2 2
3 3 1 1 1 3 2
```
