## get.corr.graph.py

### Purpose

The `get.corr.graph.py` script calculates correlations of predicted GBLUP to phenotype of k-fold cross-validation runs and optionally generates a graph across the runs.

### Options

To view the specific command-line options and their descriptions for `get.corr.graph.py`, please execute the script with the `--help` argument:

```bash
python scripts/get.corr.graph.py --help
```

Options:

*  `-h, --help`:
show this help message and exit
*  `--gblup GBLUP [GBLUP ...]`
    * List of GBLUP file(s) (space-separated).
*  `--pheno PHENO`
    * Path to the phenotype file.
*  `--phenotype_col PHENOTYPE_COL`
    * Phenotype column name in the phenotype file.
*  `--missing_value MISSING_VALUE`
    * Value denoting missing phenotypes.
*  `--n_cores N_CORES`
    * Number of parallel processes to use (default: system's CPU count).
*  `--gblup_cols GBLUP_COLS [GBLUP_COLS ...]`
    * The GBLUP columns to plot (space-separated). Use GBLUP_A, GBLUP_G, etc. or 'all' to plot all columns.
*  `--save_plot SAVE_PLOT`
    * File to save the plot. If not specified, the plot will be shown.
*  `--plot_set {T,V}`
    * Choose which set to plot: 'T' for training, 'V' for validation.
*  `--save_csv SAVE_CSV`
    * File to save the correlation results as a CSV.

### Example Usage

Below is a command showing how `get.corr.graph.py` could be used:

```bash
python scripts/get.corr.graph.py \
    --gblup ./run_*/out/proj1_gblup.csv \
    --pheno path_to_phentype/traits.txt \
    --missing_value -9999 \
    --pheno_col 3

```

Or to save a plot of the correlations: 

```bash
python scripts/get.corr.graph.py \
    --gblup k1_gblup.csv k2_gblup.csv k3_gblup.csv \
    --pheno path_to_phentype/traits.txt \
    --pheno_col 3 \
    --gblup_cols GBLUP_A GBLUP_AA GBLUP_AH GBLUP_G \
    --save_plot correlation_heatmap.png
```

**Note:** The actual option names and usage may differ. Please consult the script's `--help` output for precise information.
